.TH NETRIKRC 5 "April 19th, 2004"
.SH NAME
netrikrc \- netrik configuration file

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBNetrik\fP(1) will read the file \fI~/.netrikrc\fP (i.e. the file .netrikrc
in your home directory), if present, to get default settings.
.P
The file structure is very simple: All options that can be given as command
line arguments to netrik can also be listed in this file. Just put all options
you wish (including the leading "--") here, one on a line.
.P
As every option also has an inverted version (usually --no-foo instead of
--foo, but there are a few excepions), You still can override the defaults from
this file by command line options.
.P
You can also specify a URL in the config file, simply putting it on a line
without any options. It will serve as a home page: It will be loaded when no
other file is given upon netrik invocation, and ignored otherwise.

.SH OPTIONS
Note: \fBnetrik\fP is still in early development state; options are subject
to changes.
.TP
.B --force-colors
Force usage of \fBnetrik\fP's default text colors (white on black for
normal text), even if the terminal has other defaults. Without this
option, \fBnetrik\fP tries to adopt to the terminal's default. (Thus
keeping the light background of most xterms.)
.TP
.B --no-term-width
When using the pager, this causes a page that contains extremely long
words to be rendered wider than the screen, instead of breaking the
word. Note however that side scrolling isn't implemented yet -- you
won't be able to see the end of the line when using this option... In
dump mode, this option causes usage of the default width of 80 columns
instead of what the terminal definition says. (Words are always broken
in dump mode.)

.TP
.B --fussy-html
Abort on any HTML syntax errors or warnings encountered. A short error
description is printed. (This description may not be terribly useful at
times...) This mode is primarily intended for HTML debugging. (Note however
that \fBnetrik\fP may oversee some errors; but most are reported.)
.TP
.B --clean-html
Do not abort on HTML syntax errors. Error descriptions are printed for every
syntax error (or warning), but \fBnetrik\fP tries to parse the page anyhow.
Workarounds are used for some typical syntax errors (e.g. unescaped '<' or
'&' characters); other errors are ignored. After the whole page is loaded,
if some error(s) were found, a warning message is printed (according to the
severity of the worst encountered bug), and the pager starts after a
keypress.
.TP
.B --valid-html
This mode is identical to --clean-html, except that \fBnetrik\fP doesn't pause
after loading completes, if only warnings were generated but no real errors
were encountered. (i.e. constructs that are discouraged in the standard, but
strictly speaking are valid.)
.TP
.B --broken-html   (default)
This mode is identical to --valid-html, except that \fBnetrik\fP also doesn't
pause if only simple errors with known workaround were encountered, which
probably won't disturb layouting. Usage should be avoided if possible. (The
file syntax_error.txt or syntax_error.html in the documentation directory (see
\fBSEE ALSO\fP below) explains why.)
.TP
.B --ignore-broken
In this mode no warning is showm for any syntax errors, even if they might
cause heavily broken layouting. Don't use!

.TP
.B --debug
Before displaying (or dumping) the page, some intermediate layouting
stages are shown. (This output is described in the README.) Try it --
it's quite interesting to watch \fBnetrik\fP work :-) It can be also
useful to find HTML errors in a page, as it dumps the page while
loading/parsing it.
.br
(This option is not available if compiled with --disable-debug to ./configure)
.TP
.B --warn-unknown
Issue a warning when encountering an unknown HTML element or
attribute. This is probably only useful for debugging purposes, as
there are quite a lot of (legal) HTML facilities \fBnetrik\fP doesn't
know.
.TP
.B --dump
Just dump the file given as argument to the screen and quit, instead
of starting the pager. (The page is layouted correctly.)
.br
You may want to give the --bw option also (see below), which will ensure the
dump is plain text without any control sequences.
.TP
.B --no-proxy
Ignore the "http_proxy" and "HTTP_PROXY" environment variables with
--builtin-http. (No effect on wget! See below.)
.TP
.B --no-builtin-http
Use \fBwget\fP(1) to retrieve pages from a HTTP server, instead of the builtin
HTTP handling code. Note that HTTP redirects in most cases cause
relative links in the page to be broken when using wget. The builtin
HTTP code seems to work good now; using wget shouldn't be
necessary. (FTP pages however are always loaded via wget.)
.TP
.B --no-anchor-offset
When jumping to an anchor (following a link with a fragment
identifier), the page will be scrolled (if possible) so that the
anchor will stand just below the screen top. (In the second line,
which is the first line in which links can be activated.) By default,
the anchor is at about 1/5 of the screen height below the top.
.TP
.B --cursor-keys
Use the arrow keys to move the cursor, instead of the lynx-like navigation used
by default. (This is useful for blind users, as it allows using the "flash
cursor" keys found on braille displays.)
.TP
.B --xterm
Assume the terminal has xterm-like attribute handling. (i.e. needs a workaround
to display a bright background color.)
.br
This setting is used automatically if the terminal type ($TERM environment
variable) contains the string "xterm", so you only need to set it manually if
you have some other terminal that also needs that workaround.
.br
Note that this workaround works *only* on xterm (and maybe some other
terminals), but not on linux console, so you can't just set it categorically!
.TP
.B --console
Assume the terminal doesn't need and understand the xterm workaround for
bright background colors. (See above.)
.TP
.B --dark-background
Use the color definitions from \fIcolors-dark.c\fP (formerly
\fIcolors.alt.c\fP). A black background will be used (even if the terminal uses
a bright background by default!), and a set of foreground colors which look
very nice on black backgound. (But would be unusable on bright background.)
.br
This is the default now.
.TP
.B --bright-background
Use color definitions from \fIcolors-bright.c\fP (formerly
\fIcolors.default.c\fP). The terminal's default colors will be used for
background and normal text, and an alternative color scheme suitable for bright
background will be used for other text types.
.br
Use this if you have a terminal with bright background (like most xterms), and
also want to stick to that in \fBnetrik\fP.
.br
Note that this can be used on a terminal with dark background as well; some
colors are somewhat hard to read, however.
.TP
.B --no-force-colors
Use terminal's default colors even with --dark-background, instead of forcing
usage of \fBnetrik\fP's default text colors (white on black for normal text).
This is useful if you use the default (dark) colors and your terminal has a
black background anyways -- forcing the default colors is only a waste of time in
this situation.
.TP
.B --bw
Start up in b/w mode. Useful to avoid the warning about missing color
capabilities if you really have a terminal not capable of switching text
colors. Also useful together with --dump option.
.TP
.B --color
Undo --bw option.

.SH EXAMPLES
The following config file:
.P
.RS
--broken-html
.br
--no-anchor-offset
.br
file:///usr/local/share/doc/netrik/index.html
.RE
.P
means:
.P
--broken-html: Do not to stop on smaller HTML errors. (Use --valid-html or
--clean-html on the command line to override that for a single \fBnetrik\fP
invocation).

--no-anchor-offset: When going to an anchor, scroll the page so that the anchor will appear at the
screen top, instead of 1/5 of the screen hight below the top. (Use --anchor-offset to override.)

file:///usr/local/share/doc/netrik/index.html: When no other file name/URL is
specified on the command line, open the netrik documentation overview. (If
netrik was installed from a Debian or RPM package, use
file:///usr/share/doc/netrik/index.html instead.)

.SH VERSION
This manual page documents the config file for netrik 1.15.3.

.SH AUTHOR
Netrik was created and is maintained by Olaf D. Buddenhagen AKA antrik
(<antrik@users.sf.net>), with major contributions from Patrice Neff, Sören
Schulze, and others. (For a full listing of all contributors see AUTHORS in the
doc directory, see below.)
.P
This man page was created by antrik.

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBnetrik\fP(1)
